Support us and become VIP member
to remove all ads from www.OpenSubtitles.org
'Long is this night of sorrows Or long is my mournful song.'
'This wicked night has no end Nor does the flow of my song.'
What say. Shivy?
Sir?
He's a bachelor. sir. He doesn't understand the pain.
Laugh it up while you can.
I’m getting engaged.
This time it’s for real. sir.
Fourth time sir. same story.
Answer me this…
Will you arrive at your wedding on a horse or a police jeep?
A horse of course. sir.
Then what’s the point of being a cop?
Sir. if I show up in a police jeep.
It’ll look like I’ve come to take away a terrorist instead of a bride.
Perfect.
Your bride will stay in line just like a terrorist.
How much longer?
Two more pegs. that's all.
Then make another stiff one.
Where’s your bride-to-be from. anyway?
Dharamshala...
From Himachal.
A purebred Sardarni.
Attaboy!
Sir...
Just mount that horse and show him.
He’ll be digging canals of whiskey from Tarn Taran to Dharamshala for your wedding.
Stop the car.
Come on. step out.
Sir. please. no! Sir. please...
Come on.
Come on! - Please. sir!
Sit! On your knees!
Name?
Nihaal Singh.
Age?
Nineteen.
Village?
Bhikhiwind.
Bhi… Bhikhiwind.
Your name?
Sir. please. let me go. sir. Forgive me. sir.
Get back! Come on! - Quiet! Sit back!
Here… do it.
Me?
No sir. how can I…?
Shut up and do it.
No sir. my job isn’t even permanent yet.
We’ll make you permanent. rookie.
Let's see if you can pull the trigger first.
No sir. I won’t be able to…
No…
Fire the damn gun!
Attaboy!
Go on...
Load them back in the car.
Go on then… get to work.
- Tell me this...
When’s the date?
Haven’t set a date yet. sir.
No? -No. sir.
The thing is…
Sir. the girl has a condition.
She says she won't marry me till I make Inspector.
Bless her.
How many you got left to make Inspector?
Sir. two…
You done? - Yes.
Hold this.
'May I never deviate from doing a good deed'
There!
You're an inspector now.
Get the postmortem done and mount that horse.
'1995. Punjab… '
A north Indian state around the river Satluj.
which has been in a state of insurgency for over ten years.
The constant tension between the police and the militants had exhausted Punjab.
While the police force was trying to eliminate militancy.
a few police officers were taking full advantage of this opportunity.
They stopped distinguishing between militants and civilians.
and the people of Punjab were caught in the crossfire.
The fields had turned barren.
Leaves had dried up.
In this time of terror by uniform.
even rivers had changed their course.
Floating corpses are like floating pages of history.
They never become statistics.
They fill up with water.
They drown...
... taking justice. hope and history down with them.
'Verse chanting'
Very good! And what does it mean?
'O Lord. give me the strength So I may never deviate from doing good deeds.'
Excellent!
Here you go. And distribute them to your friends. Okay?
Kiran!
Coming mummy!
Come on. hurry up.
Give me this.
Let’s go. you’ll get me in trouble too.
Your grandparents are also coming this evening.
Kiran!
We’re here. we’re here.
Hurry up. Kiran! You’ll make everyone late again.
Don’t forget to - - bring the cake.
Let’s go…
Bye. - Bye.
It’s not possible. uncle.
The bank has already loaned you twice against this property.
We're desperate.
Please help us if you can. just this time.
But how will you return these loans?
You could lose your entire home.
We have only one son.
Sukhdev Singh.
He’s been missing for five months.
They say this time he’ll come home.
But aunty… - Please don’t ask anything more. son.
For God’s sake.
We can’t tell you anything.
I’ll try.
Send Mr. Amrik in.
Sir. Mr. Amrik Singh didn’t come in today either.
What? - Yes. sir.
Give this to the head clerk. - Yes. sir.
Tell him I sent you. - Yes. sir.
Please go with him. it’ll be taken care of.
Thank you. son.
Bless you. son.
Bless you.
Hello…
Looks like your parents won’t be coming this evening.
Why. what happened?
No idea.
But he sounded worried.
Could you talk to him?
Okay.
It’s been a week now. Nobody’s seen her.
God knows where she went.
Did you file a police report?
We tried to. son.
But cops don't take anyone’s reports these days.
We scoured the entire village.
but nobody knows anything.
We’ve sent word to the neighbouring villages as well.
Don’t worry. son.
You head home. It’s getting late.
It’s Kiran’s birthday. she’ll be waiting.
Don’t worry.
We’re all here. aren’t we?
Go…
Jassi!
Mindro. open the door!
Aunty? - Jassi! Let me in. son. Open the door!
What happened? - Jassi!
Kirpal never listens to me.
You're his friend. right? You make him understand!
Gurpej... what happened? - Mindro!
Mindro! I've told him so many times...
"Come inside. come inside. You'll catch a cold."
But he doesn't listen.
What happened?
Brother! You come with me. Talk some sense into him. He'll listen to you.
Children these days...
They never listen to anyone!
He'll catch a cold.
He's drenched from head to toe.
Who?
Kirpal! He's lying there in the street!
My Kirpal! - Jassi!
Kirpal!
Jassi. brother? Hello!
Greetings.
Ma... Jassi's here.
Greetings. aunty. - Greetings.
How are you? - Bless you.
It's been a while. Jassi.
I came to meet Satnam.
Is he home?
No… He hasn’t been home since he got his new posting.
It’s been 4 days now.
You tell me... Pammi's fine?
Yes.
Dilbag! - Yes?
Get some water for Jassi. And get him some sweets.
Yes. right away...
Finish this quickly. I’ll be right back.
Dilbag got posted in Chandigarh.
He’s leaving today.
That’s why Jimmy is so upset.
Hasn’t eaten anything since morning.
What’s your business with the police?
It’s… Aunty Gurpej.
You must have heard…
Yes.
I saw her about a week ago...
... serving at the Gurudwara.
Poor woman’s been all alone since Kirpal’s death.
So long as she remembers Kirpal’s no more.
she stays fine.
But when she forgets.
she wanders into police stations looking for him.
She’s lost her bearings. poor thing.
But don’t you worry.
She’ll be back.
Here. have some jaggery.
There's a grimness in the air. son.
Who knows when this season will pass.
Got quite late?
Found out anything?
Not yet.
She was waiting for you.
Wouldn’t even cut the cake.
You’re still up?
Had to prepare a list of books for the library.
Thought I might as well do that.
I’ll take that.
I’ll get you some dinner?
No.
Kids asleep?
They just slept.
Happy birthday. darling.
What's on your mind?
Can't sleep?
I'm thinking what Kirpal would do if he was in my place.
He would also do what you're thinking.
Congratulations. congratulations!
Happy birthday and promotion on the same day.
At this speed. Mr. Inspector will be married by next week.
The DSP's blue eyed boy. his blue eyed boy.
That's enough!
Distribute it to everyone. - Yes sir!
Congratulations. sir.
Go on. have some cake. - Congratulations. sir.
Greetings.
Right...
At your service. - Hello.
We need to file a report.
This is Bibi Gurpej Kaur. from Khalra.
She's been missing for a week.
What's she to you?
She's my friend's mother.
Gurpej Kaur Bannowal.
Kirpal Singh Bannowal's mother. isn't she?
That terrorist's.
A mother's a mother. sir...
Be it a rebel's. or a cop's.
When the crop is bad...
... the rot is in the roots.
Wherever the rot may be...
... it's still the farmer's own farm. isn't it?
Here you go... have some cake.
Go on. have some.
Just file our report. please.
Take some of our cake...
... and we'll take your report.
What’s her name?
Bibi Gurpej Kaur.
And age?
Around 65 or 70.
Village? - Village Khalra.
Sorry… there’s no one by that name.
You were here yesterday as well. right?
Yes.
Excuse me...
Excuse me. are you done?
Yes…
No need for pity.
Nobody cares about them.
All unclaimed bodies.
Let’s go…
If they’re unclaimed. who brought them here?
Not the milkmen. obviously.
It’s no secret who brings them.
but nobody does anything.
Who’re you looking for?
Bibi Gurpej Kaur.
I’ve searched everywhere.
Thought I’d try here as well.
Madam. Are you...
Are you done?
Satnam?
One minute…
She’s not here.
Excuse me.
Ma told me you came home.
All okay?
It’s been ten days.
I’m still looking for her.
If you can help at all…
I’m telling you as a brother…
Forget all this.
Go back home.
You’ve got a wife and kids.
A family.
She’s also family. Satnam.
Kirpal was our friend.
It's my duty to find Aunty.
Then you’re looking in the wrong places.
What?
Sir. sign.
Eight bodies.
No point scraping through ashes. Jassi.
Your own hands get dirty.
Take my advice.
Go back.
Sat -
'TARN TARAN CREMATORIUM'
Yes. tell me…
What do you want?
We’re looking for her.
Earlier. they’d bring 2-3 bodies.
Now it’s 15-20.
Sometimes they bring a truckload.
Can’t say for sure.
Their names. addresses. or any belongings?
We don't get firewood without names.
It takes 400 kilos of firewood to burn one body.
These days most of the bodies are unclaimed.
Every kilo has to be accounted for at the municipality.
Only then we get the firewood.
Where are their names written?
Maybe we'll find something there.
Here you go.
You’ll find all the names in these registers.
And these receipts?
Those are official receipts. from the wood mills…
Where the firewood comes from.
Sometimes. if the bodies pile up...
... we have to burn three on each pyre.
What's the name you mentioned?
Gurpej...
Bibi Gurpej Kaur.
Husband. Darbarilal. Son. Kirpal Singh. Village Khalra…
Here it is... over here.
Unclaimed?
Let it be.
Police encounter...
Jassi?
At this hour?
Went to the police station.
They said you’re home.
I found Bibi’s name at Tarn Taran crematorium.
In a list of unclaimed bodies.
Who is it. Sattu?
No one. ma! It’s Jassi. Be right back.
Your police station is also mentioned in the list.
And your inspector as well.
You were right.
I was searching the wrong places.
You knew everything. didn’t you?
You were there. right?
I’m talking to you. Satnam.
What is all this?
A dark truth written on black paper…
… that can neither be seen.
nor read.
You won’t understand.
That’s why I’ve come to you.
Speak the truth. Satnam.
For Kirpal’s sake.
You’re sitting on holy steps.
That night.
we got a call.
Orders from above.
Where is my Kirpal?
I want Kirpal! - What happened. lady?
I want to meet Kirpal! - Lady… step away from the car.
What happened? - I want to meet Kirpal.
Here. take this.
I’ll give you everything. You keep it.
You keep it.
I want to meet Kirpal.
Lady. listen to me… - Bring my Kirpal...
You know Kirpal. right?
You know where Kirpal is. right?
Where is Kirpal?
Tell me where he is! Where is my Kirpal? - Hey! Lady…
I want my Kirpal!
I want to see Kirpal.
Look at me. mother.
You want to see Kirpal? - Yes.
We're going to go see him right now.
Kirpal? - Yes.
I want to meet him.
You want to meet him?
Satnam!
Yes. sir.
Put mother in the car.
We’ll have a reunion today.
Bless you. son… bless you.
But... but sir…
Son...
I want to meet Kirpal. Let’s go. - Do it!
Hurry up...
I want to meet Kirpal.
Kirpal...
'May I never deviate from doing a good deed'
There!
You're an inspector now.
Get the postmortem done and mount that horse.
'Donate blood while alive; donate your eyes after death'
Greetings. - Hello.
Two bodies.
Killed in a police encounter.
Need their report...
... in 20 minutes.
Give a realistic time for a change.
It takes at least 45 minutes for one postmortem.
Doctor!
What happened?
What's the problem?
There’s just one dead body.
One is alive.
Bloody hell...
Next one ma’am. next one.
Lady. open your eyes.
Lady... lady. open your eyes.
Ma'am... open your eyes.
Get the O.T. ready. - Hold it!
There you go. madam.
Now both are dead.
Twenty minutes?
Bring her out!
I couldn’t do anything.
I couldn’t save her.
Why don’t you quit?
You think I haven’t tried?
I’m not the only one.
There are many cops like me who want to quit.
But for that. we have to sign form 311.
And whoever signs it…
they either disappear...
or they show up dead along with militants.
If I fill up that piece of paper. then you’ll be looking for me next.
When you're riding a lion. Jassi…
When you get off. the lion eats you.
What are you thinking?
There are 600 names along with Bibi's. Pammi.
The list has their families’ names. addresses… everything.
And yet they were marked ‘unclaimed’ and cremated.
Why?
Their families must still be looking for them.
These bodies are not unclaimed. Pammi.
They have families.
And they have every right to know what happened to their own.
I can’t ignore what I’ve seen. Pammi.
Someone needs to speak up for them.
And whoever does.
what about their family?
600 names.
From one crematorium.
So imagine how many in the whole district.
And how many in the whole of Punjab.
These are just the names mentioned in government records.
And those who were drowned in rivers and canals…
There’s no count of them anywhere.
Then get more records.
As many as you can find. wherever you can find them. Get them all.
It is a very sensitive matter.
We have to make our case very strong.
Otherwise there’s no point.
This was probably the first time…
… that cremation records were being unearthed to look for missing people.
Shahida. Jandiala. Durgiana. Patti…
Figures were being collected from all the cremation grounds in the district.
Details of the dead and their killers were being found under layers of ashes...
Here... Amrik Singh.
... which were recorded in the crematorium registers.
but all of them unclaimed.
Jassi. police!
These are unofficial cremation records.
This won’t be enough.
I know it won’t.
That’s why we back these up with government records.
The names of the dead and the cops who killed them are in the municipality files as well.
from where they supplied the firewood.
We tally the municipality records with the cremation records.
Earlier they’d just target rebels.
Now they abduct anyone for extortion.
It's a business... in the name of peace.
It’s a great start.
But it’s not enough.
2097 names.
From just three cremation grounds.
Durgiana. Patti and Tarn Taran.
It still isn’t enough to file a petition?
That’s not the point.
You know him?
Satvinder Singh?
These are all individual cases.
To register them in court. you need to bring their families forward.
They don’t even know that the people they’re looking for are no more.
So it's time to let them know.
You'll have to tell them.
Not all. but many missing people’s names.
their families and where they live. and their police reports.
It’s all in here.
I owe you for this.
For what. Jassi?
You showed me this path.
But what you’re doing…
It’s the work of a true Sikh.
Take care of yourself.
More than 6 months since he left. No news till date.
Is Balli a friend of yours? Do you know where he is?
I was seven years old when I last saw my father.
My mother says he'll be back.
Do you know where is he?
Five years since he left home.
They say he was killed in a police encounter. But I don’t believe it.
They don’t even give any official papers.
That’s his room.
If you know anything. please tell us.
My father was in the police.
Then he left his job.
A few days later. the police came and took him away.
Then?
Then he never came back.
How do I tell them?
Did you see their faces?
It’ll break them.
Get the hell out!
You are a lair!
How do you know he’s dead?
My son is alive! Got it?
He’s not dead!
Mummy! - Get out of here!
Mummy. please come… - You liar!
My son is alive! Mummy. come inside!
Every other day corpses show up.
We're tired of writing to your government.
No one does anything about it.
Another 6 or 7 today.
Clogged up the barrage all night.
Polluted the entire canal.
You expect us to drink this water?
This is a fight for human rights.
For all of us.
This is Navdeep’s fight.
We’ve acquired some government files…
… with detailed records of our deceased brothers.
And we want answers from the government.
That’s why we’re all here.
Yes.
You will go away son…
If the police breaks down our door. how are we supposed to find you?
Here you go. Jaswant Singh. Your cards.
Ten boxes full. Check them.
Okay?
Yes.
If anyone comes. give them this card.
Even to the police.
It has my name. address and number.
You folks have no reason to fear.
Nobody can take away our right to find our loved ones.
And the government will only give answers...
when we come forward and ask for answers.
And demand our right.
Tell us where to go. son. I’ll go with you.
All this is fine. advocate…
But you have no locus-standi.
To file these petitions.
you need to bring all their families to court.
You can’t file the petitions independently.
And all this is meaningless without the families.
Absolutely. your honour.
That’s why we’ve brought the families with us.
That’s it?
Your figures are much higher.
See we had to make a start somewhere so…
You can start with these.
Once the court shows courage. the rest will follow.
What is this human rights issue?
It’s in all the newspapers in New Delhi.
The reputation of the Punjab Police and the government is at stake.
Mr. Bitta… handle it please.
Sir...
Have you followed the Gulf war?
And now the ongoing Chechen war?
Sir do you know…
… how much noise these human rights people make all over the world?
I mean... it's just a gimmick for attention.
Just ignore it. sir.
And who is this Jaswant Singh?
I’ll handle it.
What’re you looking at?
It’s been here all night.
You’ve been here all night.
Must be tired.
It’s tea time. so I brought some.
Just one request…
I have to take the kids to school.
Once you finish. please keep the cups inside.
Sir. greetings.
56 people have surrendered today.
This is neither a victory for us…
… nor is it a loss for the terrorists.
If it’s a loss. it is a loss for all Punjabis.
And if it’s a win. then it’s a win for all Punjabis…
… that peace is finally returning to Punjab.
But there are some people who are unable to digest this peace.
And foremost among them are these human rights people.
Those that they’re calling ‘unclaimed bodies’...
are in reality working in Europe and America as menial workers.
or driving taxis to feed themselves and their families.
And over here.
these human rights people...
... are running their own propaganda against the police.
In reality. these people...
are mere puppets of foreign powers.
And now…
We must protect our Punjab from these people.
If these missing people
have become menial workers in Europe and America. or driving taxis…
Then I’d like to ask Mr. Bitta
why their names are in cremation registers instead of visa files?
Be it the body is of a rebel or a common man.
only their family has a legal claim on it.
Look at these figures.
Patti. Durgiana and Tarn Taran.
From just 3 crematoria in Amritsar district.
we found over 2000 names that were marked ‘unclaimed’.
Including their addresses.
So why weren’t their bodies returned to their families?
And the list also has the names and signatures of the policemen who brought the bodies.
By our estimate. considering all the cremation grounds. this figure it at least 25.000.
And most of them are youths under the age of 30.
This is Nyara Singh and Amrik Singh.
Both were respectable officers in a big bank.
One day they disappeared.
We found out that they too were marked ‘unclaimed’ and cremated.
Have they also fled abroad to become menial workers?
Post emergency the Punjab government has given carte-blanche to the police.
Sikhs are killing Sikhs...
while the people in power are getting rich and fat.
And the state and the courts...
have shut their eyes to the overwhelming evidence in front of them.
That’s why we’ve appealed to international human rights agencies
and the World Sikh Organisation for help.
We are not anti-police or anti-government.
We’re only against those people who. for their own promotions.
have crossed all the boundaries of humanity.
And for this I challenge Mr. Bitta to an open debate.
That he come forward and answer our questions.
The matter on human rights violations is being investigated.
You'll be getting the full report very soon.
Sir. the Rajasthan government has been claiming for some time now
that countless bodies have been flowing in from Punjab’s canals.
And this has been under investigation as well. but no result yet.
Any explanation sir?
The...
bodies being found in Rajasthan are completely unverified.
And accidents happen near the canals all the time.
A lot of people slip and fall in and...
unfortunately they drown.
It’s sad…
It’s tragic but there is no conspiracy.
Bitta sir… there are rumours you’ll be getting another two year extension?
This is a government decision.
And I leave it to them.
Sir...
The open debate that Jaswant Singh has challenged you to…
Would you like to comment on that?
When and where will this debate take place?
Who is he to -
Thank you.
Thank you for coming. - Excuse me. sir!
And thank you everybody.
And yes. please have some snacks before leaving.
Sir you never answered my question. Sir...
I don’t know about your Gulf and Chechen or whatever. but...
Things are definitely getting out of hand here.
You must have seen this.
I need a small favour from you.
Sir. one official picture. please.
Anything to end this mess.
Yesterday you said it would take another week to get out.
What changed overnight?
The DGP will fill you in.
I’m sending you to Tarn Taran.
As Senior Superintendent of Police
Sir.
And you will report only to me.
Sir. I give you my word.
Sir…
Sugga was a loose cannon.
Firing a gun was second nature to him.
As soon as he took charge. abductions. killings and encounters increased.
There was panic everywhere.
An entire generation was being wiped out from Punjab in the name of terrorism.
This bloodshed had been going on for the past ten years.
And the everyone was silent on this whole issue.
The whole issue of human rights violations was being ignored.
Far from trust...
There was fear in the hearts of the people...
which Jaswant Singh and his team fought with all their might.
Punjab Police. answer us! - Answer us!
We demand CBI Inquiry!
Down with Surjit Singh Sugga!
Hello.
Yes hello... it's not too late yet. Talk some sense into him!
Doesn’t he have any concern for his family?
Invitation from Canada.
They've called you on a special permit.
The World Sikh Organisation...
and international human rights agencies want to hear us out.
It’s time to tell the world what’s going on here. Jassi.
This could be our last chance.
Think about it.
Coming to Canada was a crucial step for Jaswant Singh.
This invitation gave Jaswant the chance to present his report on the world's stage.
The Khalsa belongs to God. Victory belongs to God.
I’ve come to this country on a special mission.
to present before you a very important report on human rights.
This report talks about the last ten years of oppression in Punjab.
It talks about thousands of mothers still waiting for their children to return.
Just one question in their eyes.
That someone find out if their children are still in this world.
When we reached the cremation grounds in search of our loved ones.
we found a complete written account of all our lost brothers.
marked ‘unclaimed’ in government registers and cremated.
They say a thief always leaves a clue.
These thieves left so many clues.
that in just 3 cremation grounds in Amritsar - Patti. Durgiana and Tarn Taran.
we found records of 2097 people.
A figure that has since increased to 6017.
According to these numbers.
the number of 'unclaimed’ bodies in all of Punjab is estimated
to be approximately 25.000.
And we appealed to our government as well.
but our words fell on deaf ears.
A mockery has been made of justice. of the law. of an entire community!
And a mockery has been made of all those families who ask nothing more of their government...
than their children’s death certificates.
To those who brand us terrorists and communalists.
I’d like to appeal to them.
People of the world...
those whom you consider the messiahs of peace
and the prophets of democracy...
first recognize their truth. and then tell us...
who is the terrorist and who is the righteous.
The Khalsa belongs to God. Victory belongs to God.
You’ll be taken care of here.
You and your family will be safe.
Thank you. But it’s not just about me or my family.
It’s about thousands of families
who have been betrayed.
and are all living in fear.
I know Jaswant. but I’m serious.
You could get killed back home.
Take the asylum. please!
If I take the asylum.
this mission dies.
Take care of yourself.
Jaswant’s efforts paid off.
The Punjab government was feeling the pressure.
And Amnesty urged the Punjab government to provide Jaswant with extra security.
You’re refusing extra security?
Do you know how special you have to be to get security?
Don’t refuse it. sir. Take it.
You’re his father. right?
Uncle. make him understand.
You’re getting four guys.
Two with him at all times.
And two standing vigilant at the gate. Left - right.
You’ll become a big man at this age. a VIP.
And Mr. Singh is also there. He'll keep stopping by.
Much appreciated.
But if you have to give security.
give it to those families living in fear of the police.
Hello.
Yes. one minute…
MLA Mahinderpal Singh on the line.
Yes. this is Jaswant Singh.
What good is Spring.
if one does not have loving worship of God?
Forgetting the Eternal. our True Friend;
One is engrossed in worldly illusion.
Sons. wives. friends. and wealth shall not go with you;
only the imperishable wealth of the Eternal will go with you.
Those entangled in false affairs are destroyed;
they are lost in the love of duality.
Without the Name of the Divine. nothing is of any use;
There is no Lord except the one Divine.
Those who remain absorbed in the Lord and renounce all. obtain him.
O Nanak. this is my prayer to God:
Please. let me meet the Lord.
I heard about the ripples you made in Canada.
I’m only doing my work.
But going abroad and slandering your own people…
Is that right?
Don’t you think we should keep our problems to ourselves?
We’ve been keeping our problems to ourselves since 1984.
But it's only been getting worse.
Somebody needs to stop this.
You have a small family.
Should anything unfortunate happen tomorrow...
Who will take care of them?
I heard you refused security as well.
You talk about one family.
I’m talking about all those families
whose loved ones were declared ‘unclaimed’.
When an ant bites.
you don’t debate with it.
You stomp it dead.
And you’re no more than an ant to these people.
And what is this rant about 25.000 bodies?
Sugga is just waiting for the order against you.
I’ve kept a prayer at home. I won't lie.
If your skin remains this thick.
then very soon he will get that order.
Understand?
Thank you. goodbye.
Bloody fool!
Why’s Jimmy barking?
You didn’t feed him?
I did.
Saag’s good. isn’t it?
Greetings. mother.
I can sniff out two things from a mile away.
One. a hot plate of saag.
And two. terrorists.
Come. mother…
Feed us some of your delicious saag today.
Greetings.
Exquisite!
Get two more plates.
Start. Come on.
The plates are here.
Brings the guests. - Yes. sir.
Let's go. come on.
Go on. sit. Right there.
Sit down.
You know them?
Yesterday. they were feared militants.
And today...
They betrayed their own people.
And those people tipped us off.
Here. have some.
Now you tell me…
What’s the punishment for being a traitor?
Eat.
Take their plates away. mother.
We shouldn't offend the Gods.
SATNAM!
Rumour has it that someone in the department is leaking inside information.
We're just looking for him.
You know who it is?
I’ll come straight to the point.
I hear Jaswant Singh is a friend of yours.
You grew up together back in Khalra.
When did you see him last?
Remember anything?
His wife’s pregnant.
Her seventh month.
He’s the eldest of the house.
Please forgive him.
Forgive him.
For God’s sake.
Forgive my son.
He hasn’t done anything.
Forgive my son. forgive him.
Look…
Look. I’m begging you.
I’m begging you. please…
Forgive him.
Alright. mother.
Let’s play a game.
If it lands in my right hand. then it’s our luck.
And if it lands in my left. then it’s his.
Eeni meeni miney mo…
Catch a traitor by his toe…
If he squeals. let him know...
Straight to hell. he will go.
Thank God!
What a fortunate son. mother.
Thank you.
Even if I forgive you for betraying your own…
But these...
terrorists that were found in your home.
What about them?
That’s betraying your country.
Right?
That deserves punishment. mother.
Good thing we found out in time.
Or things would have gotten out of hand.
We found out around 9-9:30 last night.
We found these weapons. sir.
Were they going to blow up the whole village with this arsenal?
Who knows what they were up to.
Do an inventory of these weapons. - Yes. sir.
Then get witness testimonies and send these bodies for postmortem.
3 AK-47s. - Yes sir.
2 Carbines. - Yes sir.
5 Mausers.
Yes sir.
What are you doing this late?
I'm sleeping here from tonight.
If they come. they'll find me first.
At least they won’t get to you and the kids.
First time I’m seeing you this scared.
I'm not scared for myself. Pammi.
You asked me. didn’t you…
Whoever steps up. what about their family?
This decision is for my family.
I’ve come too far. Pammi.
It’s been three months since we filed our petition.
But still no answers.
And in response. my family and I are being threatened.
We’re being watched.
But I’d like to let them know that their threats won’t work.
If something happens to me tomorrow…
If a car or a truck runs me over.
if I get shot. or if you find my body floating in some canal...
then no single cop will be to blame.
The blame will fall on the Punjab government and DGP Bitta.
who have given free reign to men like SSP Sugga.
Hey. calm down.
We are at war.
We’ve been fighting a low-intensity proxy war for the last ten years.
While it is every citizen's democratic right to ask questions.
you must also remember.
it is because of us that you have that right.
Or else Punjab would have become a militant state a long time ago.
You see...
War and peace
are two sides of the same coin.
'The Divine Truth'
leads me to the Light.
The battle drum beats in my mind’s sky
Aim is taken and the wound is inflicted.
The spiritual warriors enter the field of battle.
Now is the time to fight.
He alone is known as a spiritual warrior
who fights in defense of his faith.
Piece by piece.
he is cut apart.
We have just learned that at approximately 9:30 this morning.
CM Anant Singh was killed in an explosion at the Chandigarh secretariat.
CM Anant Singh’s assassin. Dilbag Singh. was a member of the CM’s own security detail.
But he never leaves the field of battle.
17 people were blown to shreds in the blast.
Nobody knew who was burning in the casket.
And this entire mess was being seen as DGP Bitta’s security failure.
The question is. will DGP Bitta take responsibility for his security failure?
Human rights activist. Jaswant Singh
is holding the Punjab Police responsible for the innocent lives lost
and is demanding answers from the new CM. Gurcharan Singh Bohra. and DGP Bitta.
'Verse chanting'
And what does this mean?
'Sorrow and suffering cannot touch those who walk with God.'
Very good! - Thank you.
Here Sanjiv. your tea. Come on. let's go Kiran.
Coming. coming.
Hurry up. Kiran.
Bye! - Hurry up.
Bye. bye..
Sanjiv. you finish your tea.
I'll just wash the car. then we'll leave together.
Sure.
Jaswant Singh... Come. we need to talk. - Talk about what?
Come on. Get in! - But what's the matter? Sanjiv!
Sanjiv! - Get inside!
Sanjiv!
Sanjiv! - Move it. come on!
Sanjiv. come out!
Sanjiv!
Get lost! - Let's go. let's go!
Drive. drive! - Stop!
Come on. drive! Hurry up! - Stop the car!
Long live Jaswant Singh!
Bring back Jaswant Singh!
More than 48 hours had passed since Jaswant Singh’s abduction.
Protests and vigils broke out all over Punjab.
Long live the 'brothers of the unclaimed'.
And they all had one demand...
‘Return Jaswant Singh’.
Despite two eye-witnesses.
the silence of the government echoed not just in Punjab.
but all over the world.
I urge the courts in India to conduct a fair and immediate investigation of this crime.
And to demand justice for Jaswant Singh and his family.
Is the silence of cremation grounds akin to peace?
Are human rights only for the living?
Not the dead?
For raising these two questions. Jaswant Singh was abducted from his home in broad daylight.
Only a few days ago. right here...
Jaswant Singh told the world who’d be to blame if something were to happen to him.
And I demand to know from this country’s Supreme Court and the Punjab government.
Where is Jaswant Singh?
People do not simply vanish into thin air.
This court gives the Punjab Police two months...
to find Jaswant Singh
and present him in court.
And if they are unsuccessful.
the court will order a CBI inquiry into this case.
It’s a simple case of disappearance. Mr. Bohra.
There’s no conspiracy here.
This case has become an embarrassment for us.
Punjab's image is getting tainted.
And New Delhi isn’t happy about this either.
‘Image handling’ is a politician’s job. Mr. Bohra.
not the police’s.
I have eliminated militancy in Punjab.
And it was New Delhi that gave me this responsibility.
And when you’re dealing with terrorism. you have to be ruthless.
If I have blood on my hands.
so do they.
Times have changed. Mr. Bitta.
And so has New Delhi's intentions.
And as for Punjab...
I will not let it remain a police state any longer.
You did your job. Just step aside...
and let bureaucracy take over.
The Supreme Court has given you two months.
I suggest...
... you use it to find Jaswant Singh.
Jaswant Singh is a case of disappearance.
so it could take some time.
You’re retiring in three months. remember?
Your government has promised me an extension. Mr. Bohra.
Then let’s assume...
... you need Jaswant Singh’s signature on your extension letter.
Okay?
Sir.
In this country. things get done only when New Delhi gets moving.
The time given to the Punjab Police was up.
while international pressure kept mounting.
And the Supreme Court decided to hand this case to the CBI.
And finding Jaswant Singh...
was now my responsibility.
'Association of Disappeared People' 'Amritsar. Punjab'
Paramjit Kaur?
Yes?
That’s me.
Samudra Singh. Additional Director. CBI Delhi.
We need to talk to you.
6th September...
Forgive me...
You must have recalled this day several times.
But if you would still...
Sure.
Like every day. I left with the kids for school...
There was a police jeep parked at the turning with some men in plain clothes.
They were looking at me.
Do you recognise any of them?
Then?
Then around 9:30.
Hari Singh said there was an urgent phone call from home.
Hello...
Sanjiv?
It was Sanjiv on the call.
He told me what happened.
Sanjiv. the eye-witness?
Yes.
And the police?
Yeah. yeah. Jaswant Singh.
Everyone knows him.
He’s in the newspapers everyday.
But that doesn't mean we'll buy any story you sell.
He saw it with his own eyes.
They picked him up outside his house in broad daylight.
He must be mistaken.
Why would Tarn Taran cops pick up a guy in Amritsar?
It’s out of their jurisdiction.
You can't write cock-and-bull in the report.
Go on.
Some time later. I returned home with the kids.
It felt like all the cops in Amritsar were at my house.
Whether to support or to intimidate...
... was unclear.
'DISAPPEARED - JASWANT SINGH'
The police have written ‘disappeared’ and shut the files.
But we have no other choice.
We have to fight this fight ourselves.
Thank you.
We’ll meet again if we need to.
Goodbye.
At least they used to return the bodies before.
But seeing the condition they were returned in would make anyone rise up
That's why cops started declaring them ‘unclaimed’ and burning them.
Jaswant’s files have every little detail.
From the cremation lists to the municipality records.
But now you won’t find anything there either.
The government has sealed all the cremation records.
And whatever’s left...
... is here.
Approximately 6.500.
We were preparing to go to a press conference.
You see that terrace...
There was one lady.
I think she also saw.
I saw some men pushing Jaswant Singh into a red Omni.
I even tried to stop them.
I immediately recognised they were cops. Immediately. over here.
I saw DSP Jagpal Singh. SI Tejinder Singh
and SI Ajay Kumar.
And as I was working with Punjab Daily at that point of time.
I know it was Tarn Taran police which had abducted Mr. Jaswant Singh.
Myself Sanjiv Singh...
Punjab Daily. ex.
Was anyone else there?
Pardon?
There were 2-3 men in the Gypsy behind.
I...
I tried but...
I couldn’t get a good look.
At around 9:30 in the morning. I was coming home with groceries.
when I heard the sound of a car. Honking loudly.
I turned and saw a red Omni coming up really fast.
As it slowed down to take the turn.
my gaze fell inside the car.
“Tarn Taran police has abducted me!”
Jaswant Singh was inside.
What else did you see?
The car’s licence plate.
DMT-1313.
If you have to testify in court.
you won’t hesitate?
There were 3-4 men in a red car.
First they approached Jaswant Singh.
A few words were exchanged...
then they forced him into the car and left.
Were they cops?
No...
Can't say...
They were all in plain clothes.
Do you remember anyone's face?
No. they all had their backs towards me.
That's all I saw.
Is Tejinder there? - Who are you?
You can't just barge in... - Lady. leave the way.
Who are you?
CBI. Delhi.
Hold up. sir...
Where are you off to this bright and early?
Going to pick up the DSP. - I see...
You are...?
DSP Jagpal Singh?
Yes...
Let's pick him up together. - What?
Let's go! - Let go of my hand.
Looking sharp. inspector!
Need to talk to you. Let's go.
Come on.
What's the rush?
We're leaving for a colleague's wedding.
Come back in two days.
It's not your wedding. it's your colleague's.
It'll happen without you.
Picking us up like this without any prior notice...
It's not right.
Well. at least you can tell between right and wrong.
Now spill it. where is Jaswant Singh?
Jaswant Singh who?
Which Jaswant Singh are you talking about?
The one everyone in Punjab is talking about.
Delhi. London. Canada...
Everywhere.
He’s disappeared.
But we’ve written up a report.
The police is doing its job.
If the police was doing its job. we wouldn’t have had to come from Delhi.
I was at Hemkund Sahib Gurudwara to pay my respects.
And I wasn’t alone. There were 27 of us.
You can ask anyone.
You must have stayed the night then?
Devlok Guesthouse. It’s nearby. You can find out.
There are witnesses who saw you.
In Amritsar. on 6th September.
We have their testimony.
Their testimony is mistaken.
And who are these eye-witnesses?
You know what ‘alibi’ means?
Of course you do. you're CBI after all.
We’ve got 16 of them.
Ask anyone at the police station.
They’ll tell you where we were.
Looks like they’re all from the same school.
Let’s see.
Neither did we have any complaint about Jaswant Singh.
nor did anyone have anything against the man.
So why would we pick him up?
Without reason.
Reason?
Here’s the reason.
He exposed your entire operation.
In front of the whole world.
And for fear of enquiry. you made him disappear.
Who gave you the order?
Order...
We’ve always had only one order.
To eliminate terrorism.
At any cost.
You watch the news. don't you?
You see their weapons on the 9 o’ clock news.
AK-47. LMG. hand grenades. rocket launchers...
That’s what we’re fighting against.
For the last ten years.
Everyday.
Day and night.
You talk about orders.
Which of these weapons did Jaswant Singh have?
Who’s behind all this?
Sugga?
He’s in Chandigarh.
He's back in two days.
Ask him yourself.
Sir!
1313 red Omni. It's one of your cars?
Of course it’s mine. sir.
Number one taxi service from Jalandhar to Ludhiana.
Where was your 1313 on 6th September?
Probably on a booking. sir.
Why. what happened?
There’s no entry in your bill book.
It’s just crossed out in red here.
Oh. that’s our code for government bookings.
No entries or bookings needed for you folks obviously.
Right?
Us folks? What do you mean?
It’s clear. isn’t it?
You folks... cops.
And who were these cops?
Inspector Shivender Singh and SI Harinder Singh.
From Tarn Taran.
They took the car.
When did they take it?
On 5th evening. They said they were going out of town.
But they brought the car back in two days. on the 7th.
But sir. what’s the matter?
Where’s your 1313 right now?
Hold my beer.
Your acquaintance?
Greetings.
We’re friends of the groom.
I see.
Just arrived from Delhi.
From Delhi? - Yes.
To surprise him. - Oh wow...
And you?
Myself?
Harinder Singh.
Sub-insector.
Tarn Taran police.
Best man and best friend.
Oh wonderful!
And where is Mr. Inspector?
Mr. Inspector?
Come with me. I’ll take you to him.
Come on.
Let's make you meet your friend.
Mind the step. Mind it.
Mr. Inspector.
Mr. Inspector!
Look who it is!
Surprise!
Who are they?
Not friends?
CBI. Delhi.
Congratulations on the wedding.
I was there only...
... on 6th September.
In Dharamshala.
For my engagement.
You took this Omni?
1313?
You were with him as well?
You were with him?
Yeah. so?
This Omni was used to adbuct Jaswant Singh on 6th September.
There are eye-witnesses.
They’re mistaken.
I was on leave from the 5th.
Really?
We found an entry in your name at Kang police station. on 5th September.
You locked up some Kehar Singh there.
How? You were on leave.
And why did you put him in Kang?
Isn’t he in charge there?
First I took him to Tarn Taran and Jhabal.
Cells were full so I brought him to Kang.
And? - And nothing.
I left for Dharamshala the next day.
On 6th September.
You can check if you want.
Oh I’ve checked everything.
It takes half a lifetime for a sub-inspector to make inspector.
You made it in less than ten months.
And in these ten months.
both your names are mentioned
in firewood receipts of 21 unclaimed cremations.
How come?
I guess only your Jaswant Singh can answer that question.
And where is our Jaswant Singh?
Since you’ve found out this much already...
Find him as well.
You’ll get all your answers.
Jaswant Singh was a known name.
So they would never make the mistake of keeping him in Tarn Taran or Jhabal.
On 5th September.
Kehar Singh was detained in Kang police station.
Why?
Because they had empty cells.
And on 7th September. he was released.
And Jaswant Singh was abducted on 6th September.
Maybe they brought him here too.
Kang police station.
And only one person can confirm this.
Kehar Singh.
I had a hearing in court on the 5th.
After that. they detained me for two days.
At Kang police station.
Was anyone else there?
No sir... not on the first night.
Then...
... on the second day. they brought someone in the next cell.
Who was it?
Anything you saw. or remember?
No I didn’t see him.
But I heard his name.
Some Jaswant Singh.
Think hard.
You sure you heard Jaswant Singh?
Yes. it was Jaswant Singh.
All the cops were shouting his name. abusing him.
Then later...
... the SSP himself showed up.
And he started beating him.
Then?
Then they left after a while.
leaving one cop behind to stand guard.
What’s his name?
Don’t know his name. sir. He wasn't in uniform.
But yes... he had green eyes.
Like emeralds.
He brought me food that night.
Will you be an official witness?
What?
Will you testify?
We sold the farm to bring him back once already.
If they pick him up again. I have nothing left to sell.
Don’t worry.
I’ll guarantee his safety.
Pack of mongrels hunting for scraps.
Let’s see how long they bark.
As long as they bark and don't bite. sir.
Sniffing around as they please.
Wherever.
They picked me up before my vows.
Humiliated me in front of 400 guests.
Then made me sit around all night.
Is it right. sir?
They raided three police stations last evening.
Picked up some files as well.
When there’s nothing in those files.
what will they find?
Get the bottle!
When you’ve done nothing wrong.
why are you worried?
Just remember...
that we are Punjab Police.
And as far as I remember.
the name of this state is still Punjab.
Hasn’t changed.
Got it?
Okay...
Now. get lost.
Sir.
6th September.
Remember where you were?
Chandigarh.
At my niece’s wedding.
I kept a prayer on the 6th.
You must be knowing Jaswant Singh.
The human rights fellow...
... who’s disappeared these days.
I’ve seen him in newspapers.
Jaswant Singh mentioned you in his last speech.
And he also said that if anything happens to him.
... then who would be responsible.
Anything to say?
You’re an educated man.
Tell me something.
Today if I say...
if something happens to me then you’ll be responsible.
and if something actually happens to me tomorrow...
then are you responsible?
You’ll go to jail?
Tea.
You’re involved in over a thousand abductions and extrajudicial killings.
So it's clear why he’d take your name.
Extrajudicial killings.
You were in Delhi Police before you joined the CBI. right?
In ’86?
You were present in Delhi’s Trilokpuri riots in ’84. weren’t you?
How many did you kill in ’84?
And which killings were those?
Judicial or extrajudicial?
Sugar?
You don’t have the depth. Samudra Singh.
to conceal all the secrets of ’84.
Mr. Sugga.
Recounting ’84 won’t change the figures of ’95.
It’s not just about one Jaswant Singh.
It’s about thousands more.
You’ll have to account for them.
Punjab’s account has always been complicated.
We’re fighting those who don’t get captured. only killed.
They killed DIG Sabarwal on the steps of the Golden Temple.
Nobody went near the body for six hours.
You need to call the army to kill these people.
Even cannons fall short.
One bullet of ours is fired in response to how many of theirs...
an outsider like you won’t understand.
You know what a vice is?
You have your head in a vice.
Pressure from above or below...
You’re the one getting squeezed.
Sooner or later. you’ll have to answer for Jaswant Singh.
Here... or in court.
Remember that.
We’ll meet again.
It’s been two-and-a-half months since Jaswant Singh’s disappearance.
But the Punjab government is still silent.
Perhaps they aren’t aware
that Jaswant Singh isn’t just the name of a man.
Jaswant Singh is the name of a cause.
This is no ordinary fight.
but the fight of a brother of the unclaimed.
who openly challenged the government.
This is a fight for what's right.
Jaswant Singh! Jaswant Singh!
Brothers of the Unclaimed!
I quit the job at the library.
This fight is a full-time job.
What brings you here?
We found a new witness.
Kehar Singh.
He says that on 6th September...
Jaswant Singh was held at Kang police station.
In the next cell.
Now we have three witnesses.
And very soon.
we'll appeal to the court for the hearing.
Anyone home?
Sugga.
Diwali is in two days.
so I brought something for the kids.
Sparklers.
Bomb?
How about a spinner?
Spinner.
Here. go play. Spinner.
Stubborn.
Like his father.
I won’t lie. sister.
Small. big.
old. young...
I’ve killed many.
But I didn’t touch your Jaswant Singh.
We want to help you.
We want to find him and bring him to you.
Then find him.
It’s your duty.
But how?
You’re blaming us as well. aren’t you?
Retract your statement against the police.
And we’ll find him and bring him back.
To you.
To your kids.
Then you can take asylum. America. Canada. London...
wherever.
And we’ll forget everything as well.
Even Jaswant Singh wouldn’t agree to return on these terms.
So how will you bring him?
You don’t know Jaswant Singh.
I do.
You can leave.
And please take these with you.
Put them up in your police station.
It'll be appreciated.
Since you know Jaswant Singh so well...
Then know this as well.
If I have to answer for 25.000 corpses.
Then I’ll answer for 25.001.
Remember that.
Sir...
End of an era.
My untimely retirement
is a new year's gift to the militants.
I hope the new government has thought this through.
And I also hope that Mr. Varma
continues to preserve the dignity of the uniform. as I have.
I’m not much of a speech man.
I prefer to be brief and straight.
My aim is to sanitize and sensitize the force.
without lowering our guard.
For the past few years.
because of a few police officers.
not just Punjab Police.
but the whole state has suffered disrepute.
But...
we will not repeat their mistakes.
And for this I need your support.
The fear that Punjab’s people have of the police...
First we must eliminate that fear.
And we must win back their trust.
I’m sure I have your full support in this mission.
Thank you.
‘Devil in Police Uniform.’
‘Butcher of Gurdaspur.’
‘Police or...
ex... executioner’.
What are the newspapers writing about you...
Ever read them?
Now... where is Jaswant Singh?
Sir?
Jaswant Singh.
He’s disappeared. sir.
But we’re trying our best to find him.
You’ve been trying for over two months.
It takes some time. sir.
Surjit Singh.
I was DGP Intelligence before this.
I know you very well.
The CBI is already on your tail.
An inquiry could start any day.
Then all your pending cases will reopen.
Getting away this time
won't be so easy for you.
You have seven days.
I want Jaswant Singh.
At any cost.
Seven days.
Yes. sir.
He’s given me seven days.
He says find Jaswant Singh.
How do I find him. you tell me?
The CBI has a hearing date from the court.
There were two eye-witnesses.
Now there are three.
Forget Jaswant Singh for now and find out...
who this third joker is.
Move ahead. - Come. next.
Stop right there - CBI. Delhi.
Here they come sniffing around.
You finish your report. and meet me at the station.
Yes sir.
Killed in a raid last night.
There’s no one home.
Mr. Sanjiv left with his family two days ago.
Did he say where they’re going?
No. he didn’t say and I didn’t ask.
They’ve left.
Harpal’s house is also locked. sir.
It’s empty.
This is nothing...
... but a complete mockery of the judicial system.
There were three strong witnesses in this case.
Two of them are missing.
.... and one ends up dead.
Just one day before the hearing.
And the irony of the matter is...
that despite several loopholes in their alibis. these cops are still serving in the force.
But Mr. Jais. there has to be at least one strong piece of evidence to back up your claims.
Just this isn’t enough.
Your honour...
A family...
breaks their back day and night
to raise and educate their kids.
Then one day those kids. no more than 20-22 years old. disappear.
When they don’t return in a few days. the parents
go to the police. where they are turned away.
In fact they are told that their kids...
... are with terrorists.
For a little bit of money. you'll get them back.
Objection. your honour!
Irrelevant to the case. - Mr. Dahiya. please...
Overruled. - Let me finish.
Mr. Jais. come to the point quickly.
Your honour.
by the time the parents somehow gather the money.
some other cop shows up and buys those kids for a higher sum.
and then kills them along with the terrorists.
And we all know the reason.
Because more dead militants equals bigger promotions. Am I right?
Objection. your honour! - Overruled.
But it doesn’t end there.
Then it's the turn of the poor parents.
Those aged. helpless parents...
are then harassed by branding their children as terrorists.
And you know why?
To extort from them the same money
they had arranged to save their children.
Objection!
This is a blatant attempt to slander the police.
Then tell me this...
How are these cops. who were constables ten months ago.
sitting here as Inspectors today? Do you have an answer?
Your honour. the prosecution is insulting the court with these fake stories.
These are not stories. your honour.
These are the details of the petitions that those parents
had filed against these policemen in the high court.
Please have a look at this.
And these are the same officers. your honour...
... that the eye-witnesses saw abducting Jaswant Singh.
Their recorded testimonies are included.
But the trouble is...
that they either turn hostile out of fear. or turn up dead like Kehar Singh!
The prosecution is making wild accusations without any proof.
Mr. Dahiya. please... - Mr. Dahiya...
Due to the serious allegations and suspicious nature of this case.
in the interest of public security.
this court determines that
DSP Jagpal Singh.
Inspector Shivender Singh.
sub-inspector Tejinder Singh. sub-inspector Harinder Singh. inspector Ajay Kumar.
and SSP Surjit Singh Sugga should be suspended on immediate basis.
until the final hearing.
The court is adjourned.
Told you...
you’re the one getting squeezed.
Your seniors have retired.
and juniors suspended.
All they have to do is start talking.
And game over.
Sugar?
Mr. Sugga...
Give the phone to Bitta sir.
He’s not at home. You are?
SSP Tarn Taran. Sugga.
Hello...
Is Bitta sir back?
Good boy.
Hello. - Sir. I’ve been calling for hours.
But it looks like you’ve abandoned me.
Are you drunk?
Forgive me. sir...
... but I’m losing my mind.
I’ve always respected you. sir.
I fired in any direction you pointed me in.
Picked up anyone you told me to.
You have Delhi behind you.
Who do I have?
Sugga...
You’re not in your senses right now.
We’ll talk later.
I’ll handle it.
You keep saying you’ll ‘handle it’...
but nothing got handled. did it.
Watch your tongue. Sugga!
Nobody has ever talked to me this way.
Then do something. sir.
Get me transferred out of here.
That’s what's best for everyone.
Or else...
... everyone goes down with me.
Listen to me carefully...
and do exactly as I say.
I won’t let anything happen to you.
Hey! Nobody follows me!
Nobody! Move it!
Move... Move back.
We found this evidence in his pocket.
Looks like a suicide note.
Body was found in two pieces. sir.
Head clean off the shoulders. Was tough to recognize at first...
Then we identified him.
The Khalsa belongs to God. Victory belongs to God.
I am not here to grieve.
but to pay tribute to a brave police officer.
At the peak of terrorism.
Tarn Taran was considered to be the rocket...
that would blow Punjab out of this country.
In these circumstances. I was looking for an officer...
who had the courage to face the terrorists....
... and mount a strong campaign against them.
And in this situation.
SSP Sugga was one such officer who stepped up and took charge.
You call him power-hungry?
What power?
If anyone was powerful. it was the terrorists.
And the press was their mouthpiece.
and judiciary paralysed.
This suicide by a Sikh warrior is not an action of a coward.
It was not fear that drove him to death.
It was ingratitude and false allegations
made by the CBI.
and the human rights people...
which forced him to take such a drastic step.
The Indian state must learn to protect
officers like SSP Sugga. or the day isn’t far...
when Punjab will once again go back ten years.
Don’t know his name. sir. He wasn't in uniform.
But yes... he had green eyes.
Like emeralds.
Thank you. Jai Hind!
You know Kehar Singh?
And Jaswant Singh?
You'd bring him food at Kang police station. right?
Yes...
Sugga sir put me on guard duty.
But...
only for a few days.
Sir...
I’m not lying. I’m just an ordinary SPO.
My job isn’t even permanent yet.
Become a government witness.
We’ll make you permanent.
All five of these cops know that you know everything.
If they find out tomorrow that you're here...
... with us.
What do you think?
They’ll spare you?
Kuljit...
Where were you on the night of 6th September?
Kang police station.
I was on guard duty.
Who were you guarding?
It was... some...
Some Kehar Singh.
They held him there for two days. then released him.
And?
Who else was there?
Kuljit...
No one else. Just Kehar Singh.
Kuljit. that night at Kang police station.
was Jaswant Singh kept in Kehar Singh's neighbouring cell or not?
He wasn't.
All the other cells were empty. You...
You can check the register.
There’s no entry by this name.
There was no one else there?
The CBI...
has registered your written statement in court. in which it is clearly written that...
you saw Jaswant Singh at Kang police station that night.
No. not there. the question came from here. look here.
Did you see him or not?
I... - Did you see him or not?
Yes or no? Did you see him or not?
Sir they gave me money.
To speak against the police.
I don’t know any Jaswant Singh.
He's lying!
Please be quiet. - He's lying!
Quiet! Please sit down!
Make him sit.
Who gave you money?
Kuljit...
Don’t be afraid.
Who gave you the money?
Have you lost it? What is this rubbish?
Why're you lying? Who's putting pressure on you?
Who is pressuring you? - Calm down.
Sit down... - Calm down.
Calm down - Why are you lying?
Who has pressured you? - Calm down
Be silent... - Why are you lying?
Cool down Samudra.
Maintain order in this court.
Your honour. his wife is sitting there. he keeps looking at her.
Sit down. - He's been pressured. your honour.
I will not have any disorder in my court room.
Why the hell are you lying? - Samudra...
You will not get away with this.
Thie hearing is adjourned.
It will resume after the recess.
How did you let a witness make such a fool out of you?
And then you attacked him in court.
Have you completely lost it?
We've lost it. sir.
Bitta was absolutely right.
This is a war and...
We've lost it.
Samudra. once again you’re taking all of this too personally.
So I’ve made a decision.
Take a break.
Let someone else take over this case.
Kuljit.
Recognise me?
I’ve come straight from the river.
To meet you.
I’m not alone there.
There are many like me.
Children.
women.
the old.
They will come.
One by one. they will all come.
In the winter.
when the water freezes at night. Kuljit...
it gets really cold.
On the outside...
and on the inside.
It’s an open wound.
So the water rushes in.
Look.
Water rushes in. Kuljit.
Why should I trust you this time?
I got scared last time.
Of what?
The police.
And this time?
God.
I don’t believe him.
I believe him. sir.
What guarantee is there that this Kuljit Singh...
... is telling the truth this time?
He’s already turned hostile in court once.
No guarantee. sir.
But my gut tells me he’s telling the truth.
Your gut has been wrong before. Samudra.
In any case. why are we still discussing this?
The court will never give you permission to present Kuljit as a witness again.
That’s why I’ve come to you three. sir.
To request special permission.
This is not only about Kuljit Singh sir.
It’s about probably the biggest genocide our country has seen post independence.
Look at the history of Punjab. sir.
Be it the river waters dispute or the Anandpur Sahib resolution.
or the ’84 riots.
insurgency. Black Thunder...
from President’s Rule to the CM’s assassination. and now...
Jaswant Singh!
Why is Punjab suffering?
This is a vicious circle of violence
which the powerful use for their own agendas. and it will never stop. It will go on and on
until we don’t step in and set an example.
Or...
we can just turn a blind eye
and be on the wrong side of history forever.
And we’ll never be able to forgive ourselves for this.
We are answerable here. sir.
We are answerable to our conscience. We are answerable to those families...
whose loved ones were marked ‘unclaimed’ and cremated by these people.
We are answerable to Jaswant Singh’s family.
and yes. we are answerable to Jaswant Singh.
Jaswant Singh! - Long live!
Brothers of the Unclaimed! - Long live!
Jaswant Singh! - Jaswant Singh!
Bring back Jaswant Singh! - Bring him back!
Jaswant Singh! Brothers of the unclaimed!
Kuljit.
This is your last chance.
If you lie or change your statement again.
You will be charged with contempt of court.
Do you understand?
Kuljit...
This is your last chance.
Tell them the truth.
On the night of 4th September.
Bitta sir called the SSP to his house.
DSP Jagpal was with him.
We were there for about an hour.
Then the next morning
SSP sir told me to go with the DSP to Tarn Taran.
That night...
on 5th September.
the DSP held an urgent meeting at Tarn Taran police station.
in which inspector Ajay Kumar.
Sub-Inspector Harinder Singh.
Tejinder Singh.
and inspector Shivender were there.
The next morning
On 6th September...
we started watching Jaswant Singh’s house.
After some time. Jaswant Singh came outside
and started washing his car.
Everyone thought the time was right.
Let's go.
Jaswant Singh.
The SSP wants to see you.
He wants to talk to you. - Let's go.
What does he want to talk about? - Come on.
Sanjiv! - Come on. get in!
Sanjiv! - Don't fret. come on.
Sanjiv! - Get lost!
Hurry up drive. drive!
Hey! Stop the car!
Then we took Jaswant Singh straight to Kang police station.
In the evening. SSP Sugga came as well.
He tried hard to convince Jaswant Singh.
There’s still time.
Start behaving.
Stop chasing the police.
Or I’ll bury you alive right here.
With your list of 25.000 corpses.
This is a fight for human rights.
For the whole community.
You people started this genocide.
I won't stop.
We’ll do it for you.
We know how.
The world will keep searching.
Your children will roam...
... as orphans.
They’re children of faith.
They’ll never be orphans.
And if I die a martyr.
then one day you’ll have to commit suicide.
Remember that.
I’ll have to commit suicide?
Me?
Son of a Bitch!
I'll have to kill myself?
Bastard! I'm going to kill myself?
I'm going to commit suicide?
Sir stop... He'll die.
Let's go.
Listen! You keep an eye on him. understand?
Son of a bitch!
Let's go! - Yes sir.
Back it up!
Jaswant Singh was kept there for the next three days.
The police was under constant pressure to find him.
So we moved him to an old house near Jhabal.
Tejinder.
Open it.
He was kept there for several weeks.
Found out yet?
Whose farm is it?
If you wish
to play the game of love
I warned you.
Don’t get involved.
If you wish to play the game of love
Come my way with your head in the palm of your hand
If you set foot on this path
Don't hesitate to give your head.
Son of a bitch!
Give me that.
Here's my account!
I'll put a bullet in you right now!
Sir. no! No!
Let go. I'll kill this bastard today!
Here's my account for 25.000 bodies!
I'll kill him... - Let's go out. come on.
Don't hesitate to give your head.
Don't hesitate
to give your head.
Then on the day before Diwali.
the SSP instructed me to bring Jaswant Singh to his farmhouse.
And...
Bitta sir was already there.
Hey!
What the hell are you saying? - Please be quiet!
Please be quiet! Please sit. - He's lying!
Order order.
He's a liar.
Please be quiet! - Traitor!
What happened then?
Then...
A little later. Bitta sir stormed out in anger.
got into his car and left without a word.
What happened inside...
was known only to the SSP
and to Bitta sir.
The rest of us were outside.
Then we took Jaswant Singh straight to Jhabal police station.
Come on!
Get him out. - Come on.
Let's go.
Attaboy!
No point talking to him.
Why don’t you just do what Bitta sir says?
What will all this accomplish?
Even if you die...
what will change?
You still have time.
It's up to you now.
Kuljit.
When the sun was setting for the first time.
and darkness was engulfing every...
... engulfing everything.
The world thought...
that the darkness would last forever.
People were frightened.
They started losing all hope of light.
That’s when. far away
in some little hut.
a lamp raised its head
and said.
“I challenge the darkness”.
However deep the darkness may be.
I will light up...
... my surroundings.
And watching the strength of this lamp.
other lamps arose in other huts.
And the world was amazed...
that these little lamps defeated the darkness. Kuljit.
You or I...
can’t defeat the darkness alone.
But we can be a lamp.
and defeat the darkness around us. Kuljit.
Are you listening. Kuljit?
Twenty five thousand... and one.
Go on.
Get some hot water.
Move it!
Dump him in the river.
The fish in Harike are starving.
I can’t ignore what I’ve seen. Pammi.
Someone has to come forward for them.
You asked me. didn’t you…
Whoever comes forward. what about their family?
This decision is for my family.
Then we... we took him...
... to Harike.
Pull him out! - Come on.
Here. take this.
Watch Online Movies and Series for FREE
www.osdb.link/lm